[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to see how some of the foundational issues that
we've been developing for geometry relate to
Primary School mathematics education geometry is
a lovely and important subject that young people
should see more of it's been unfortunately sadly
neglected in the last few decades and it's
really time that geometry was brought back as
an important even an essential part of a Young
Person's education let's start by emphasizing
a few main points I think the use of a graph
paper or what I call the grid plane is a key
point in making this subject more accessible and
more clear to young people it's also a great way
of connecting the two subjects of arithmetic
and geometry these two naturally have lots of
links and a grid plane like this brings out those
connections now although this Foundation series
has been concentrating on The Logical development
really meant for higher mathematics nevertheless
there are some natural connections to primary
school education but it would be wrong to think
that I'm suggesting that The Logical treatment
that we've been using so far or developing V in
should be applied directly to primary school
education rather one should be aware of the
goals and main ideas in developing curriculum for
primary school and I'm not going to be doing that
today just giving you a few random ideas when
we start with the grid plane the first thing
that strikes us I suppose is that it's divided
up into a lot of little squares that we can call
cells and as very easy for students to think
of rectangles or squares as being created from
these basic cells this naturally connects with
arithmetic because after all counting the number
of cells or counting the area of a rectangle is
naturally really a question of multiplication
and as the ancient Greeks realized there are many
other aspects of Elementary algebra or arithmetic
that connect naturally to geometrical pictures
for example if you want to sum 1 + 2 + 3 + 4
and perhaps carry on like that then one natural
ways to think of that sum as being this figure
here and if you take another copy of it and
add it there then you see that twice that
sum whatever it is is this rectangle showing us
that 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 is half of 4 * 5 and that's
now a formula that students can remember because
they can associate it with a picture like this
there's also some other fun things that one
can do one can talk about for example animals
configurations created from cells put adjacently
like that and it's natural for example to try to
classify or count all the different animals of a
difference of certain size we can create circles
very precise way by the use of graph paper and
of course we can talk about points and lines in
a very explicit and direct way so a line in
this context is something that students can
easily understand there's a regular pattern going
over two up one over two up one that determines
a line it makes it easy for us to talk about
parallel lines as well as perpendicular lines and
there's no reason why young people can't be taught
about the notion of a vector which describes the
relative position of two points in the early years
there's no need to have a coordinate framework we
can just deal with the graph paper as it is and
talk about the relative position of points of
course we're can also talk about triangles as
being half of rectangles or more generally as
being created from parallelograms by taking half
of them so there many natural questions having to
do with counting having to do with areas having
to do with distances and also in terms of paths
for example one can count the number of paths from
one corner to the opposite corner of a square or
rectangle it's a very interesting problem which
is naturally associated with all kinds of Rich
arithmetic number of paths here is 20 the number
of paths from here to here I'll let you check is
10 when teaching young people geometry it's
important to be precise logical and concrete
a piece of graph paper helps us to achieve that
instead of talking about parallel lines in this
nebulous way as just two lines which don't
meet if you extend them in the grid context
it's very explicit two lines are parallel if they
have the same direction vectors over one up three
over one up three therefore those are two lines
are parallel and there's no need to talk about
some indefinite extension that happens way up
there instead of talking about some vague triangle
like this just drawing a triangle on a piece
of paper it doesn't specify the triangle very
precisely and a student could easily be forgiven
for not being able to copy that triangle and not
know exactly what you're talking about when
we work with triangles in the context of a
piece of graph paper then we know exactly what
we're talking about and it also makes it easier
for students to both copy and to create diagrams
that are realistic and meaningful the grid paper
is also great for talking about Transformations
which are an important thing that young people
should learn about that we haven't talked about
yet in this uh foundational series but we're
going to have to for example starting off with
this shape here we can reflect it in this line
here to get this one we can translate it to get
this one here and we can rotate it to get this
thing here so these kinds of Transformations are
easily describable in terms of the graph paper
a piece of graph paper is also very good to talk
about areas of triangles which is a subject that
we also haven't yet talked about but we will so in
this case here you can see that this triangle here
has an area that can be computed by cutting and
pasting by thinking about the area of that bigger
rectangle and cutting out smaller right triangles
whose areas we can compute exactly that's a better
way of thinking about area rather than base
time height over two I'd like to emphasize
also the importance of constructions and drawing
in Geometry this is an aspect of the subject that
goes back to uid and was very important to the
ancient Greeks students should know how to for
example construct the midpoint of a segment the
classical tool for doing that is a compass and I
think every Primary School student should have a
compass and should be comfortable using it we draw
a circle there draw a circle there we see where
the circles intersect we draw a line there's the
midpoint similarly finding an altitude from a
point to a line or a perpendicular you Compass
there make a circle then you have two points
and then find the midpoint of that point that
gives you a perpendicular line and then with these
kinds of constructions under their belts students
can experience all kinds of beautiful triangle
geometry experimentally without necessarily being
able to prove them they can for example see for
themselves that the three medians of a triangle
intersect in a point that's something that every
student should see in terms of theorems and proof
there's one theorem at least that students
should see a proof of and that's Pythagoras
theorem and the proof doesn't have to be
and shouldn't be the algebraic one that
I've presented but rather a pictorial one for
example the one that you can find in my wild tra
Series in year five or six students should become
familiar with coordinates and they should at some
point learn that the equations of a line is
given this kind of formula y = 3x - 2 that's
the simplest kind of formula for students
to learn initially what a line is later on
they can learn the more fancy sophisticated way
that we've been talking about lines but this is
a good way to start also I haven't talked
too much about three-dimensional geometry
but students should be familiar with the
basic shapes and also have some familiarity
with platonic solids these are just some of the
things that students should see but I think it's
unfortunate if young people do not get exposure
to these important and classical and historical
topics next time we're going to talk about a
notion which seems simple but in fact is more
subtle than it appears it's the idea of an area
a fundamental concept for planer geometry I hope
you're going to join me for that I'm Norman
Wildberger and thanks for listening [Music]